So I'm gonna take a second.
This is the most computer
science we're gonna get, and
it's not gonna be that computer sciency.
But I wanna talk about kind of
some thought process that kind of
revolutionized the way that I thought
about writing code, and particularly,
user interface kind of facing
code/front-end development.
So there's a thing called
a Finite State Machine, or an FSM,
as it's often abbreviated.
But let's stick to a state machine,
this is what I'm gonna call it.
It's a methodology of writing code, and
how to track variables that
prevents a lot of styles of bugs.
So I think the best way to illustrate
what a finite state machine is is to use
an example.
And I'm gonna borrow this example from
xdate docs, because it's a great library
that does finite state machines,
and they have good docs.
So you as a human being are either asleep,
or awake at any given time.
And let's just assume
that that's the case.
I'm sure that you can come up with some
medical reason that's not the case.
But for now, just bear with me, I suppose.
Okay, so you're either awake,
or you're asleep.
There's no in between state there.
And you are never both awake and asleep,
and you are neither awake nor asleep.
You're either awake,
or you are asleep, and
you're always in exactly
one of those states.
This is kind of what a finite
state machine does for
you, is it's saying here are my
various different states.
I can only be in one of
these states at a time.
And I can only go from this state to this
state, and this state to this state.
So using our fox as the example,
our fox is idling.
Then they become hungry.
Then they become fed.
Then they poop, and then they get cleaned
up, and they're back to idling, right?
And so they're in one of these
distinct states at any given time.
So we're gonna kind of model
our code in the sense.
A lot of people will use like
Booleans to track these,
like is awake, is asleep,
is feeding, is fed.
And it's really easy to get out
of sync using these Booleans.
So we're gonna use something
called an enumerated type,
is what you would call it.
If you're using programming terms,
it's basically a variable that can only
be one of these separate things, right?
So you can see here,
I have a list of here.
These are actually all of the states that
our game can be in at any given time.
Our game can only be in one of these
states at any given time, right?
It can only be in it hashing,
idling, sleeping, eating, pooping,
hungry, celebrating, or
dead, and that is it.
And so our game will constantly
go through these various different
states at different points, right?
And those will have derived states, right?
So a good example of a derived state,
like our eyes closed, right?
If you're asleep, your eyes are closed.
And if you're awake your eyes are,
in general, open, right?
So that's what these kind of
derived states, is you look at
the master state of this, and then you
look at the derived states from there.
The person that talks a lot about
finite state machines in the front-end
development communities is David
Khourshid, or davidkpiano on Twitter.
Definitely worth following him.
He has an upcoming course on Frontend
Masters about finite state machines,
and I am going to watch it, because it's
something that I wanna get better at.
So I would definitely take a look at that.
By the time that you watch this,
it might have already happened,
or it might already be recorded.
So definitely keep an eye on that.
But he wrote the library called xstate,
and
it's a great way of modeling finite
state machines in JavaScript.
Actually, a really good thing to do
after this course would be go and
redo this with xstate, and I think your
code would end up cleaner, honestly.
So keep that in mind.
Maybe give it a shot.
If you do, put it on GitHub and show me.
So we're gonna kind of approximate this,
and I think we might offensively do it
to David, cuz he is a bit of a purist
when it comes to these kind of things.
But we're gonna have this
thing called current,
which is going to be basically
the state of our finite state machine.
So your game is going to start
in the state called init, right?
Which means that in init,
you can't be fed, right?
So it's a really easy thing that we
[INAUDIBLE] wait, can I do this right now?
No I can, or yes I can,
or something like that.
So what I want you to do is I want you
to pop back over to your editor, okay?
Now I want you to create a new file.
And I want you to put it in fox game
source, inside of the source directory.
And this is gonna be
called gamestate.js okay?
Inside of gamestate,
I want you to put const gamestate =,
and then it's an object, and
it's gonna have a value called current.
And that state is going to be in net.
Okay, we're gonna keep track of
what clock tick we're on, so
we can kind of keep track over time.
So we're gonna start at one.
You could start at zero,
you could start at whatever you want.
I'm just gonna start at one,
doesn't really matter.
We're gonna write our own
tick function in here, and
then we're gonna use
it in the other place.
And then whenever it ticks,
we're gonna say at this.clock++, right?
++ meaning it's going to increment every
single time that tick gets called.
For now, we're just gonna say console.log.
And we're gonna say clock, this.clock.
And then you can return this.clock.
I tend to return it, but I don't think we
ever use it anymore, so it doesn't matter.
Okay, and
then we're gonna say at the bottom,
Export default on a clock, but gamestate.
Okay, so I think in my notes there,
I actually had it as module or exports.
Really, what you want is export default,
cuz we're gonna use
the latest ES6 style modules.
Okay, so now I've made this module, and
I'm gonna go then import this inside
of init, and use it inside of init.
Okay, so
we're gonna go over to our init.js.
And at the very, very top, we're gonna
say import gamestate from "./gamestate".
So now that module,
I just wrote in the other library, or
in the other file is now available
to be used here inside of init.js.
So we can delete our tick function,
cuz we now have reimplemented
that inside of gamestate.
Here inside of where we have tick,
we're just gonna put gamestate.tick
And actually, my notes here just to
say stay consistent with my notes.
I have game, it doesn't really matter.
It's just a variable name.
But game.tick, doesn't matter.
Both of them work.
Okay, so now, if we save it, and we go
back over to our running game over here,
which, you should still have parcel
running, if not, go restart that.
And I refresh my page, which I don't,
you can see that I don't have it running.
So let's just do that npm run dev.
Okay, and
now we can go back over here and run it.
And you can see down at the bottom,
you will have our clock running.
So you can see it says 234, and it's
pretty consistent at every three seconds.
It's going to log out
the current state of our clock.
And now with our clock,
we can say if this is the correct number,
then do this thing, right?
If it's clock is equal to 10,
then make the fox hungry, right?
We're kind of making that clock work now.